Study of Shear-Cutting Mechanisms on Wood Veneer by Vicky Reichel

Abstract: Multi-material structures made from renewable materials are increasingly being addressed
in research and industry. Especially lightweight applications based on wood and polymer materials
offer an important opportunity to reduce weight and CO2 emissions, and thus create a sustainable
economy. When establishing new material combinations, it is necessary to take economical and
efficient manufacturing processes into count to enable the market entry. Therefore, the existing
manufacturing processes needed to be adapted and improved in terms of the specific machining
characteristic of the wood material. This study targets a combined process where a forming and
shear-cutting process is also integrated in an injection-molding tool. The findings on the shear-cutting
process of wood veneers are not widely investigated yet. Therefore, process and material-related
dependences like cutting velocity, tool shape design, and preconditioning of wood veneers were
examined. The target values cutting force and cutting-edge quality were used to describe the relations.
The results showed specific damage and fiber fractions of the wood material compared to the isotropic
materials (e.g., metal). In addition, low cutting forces appeared by realizing a drawing cut and high
cutting speeds. A decrease in the cutting force with a higher moisture content could not be shown for
the used wood types.

1. Introduction
Due to environmental changes, renewable and degradable material solutions are gaining increasing
interest as lightweight solutions in industry and academia, in order to reduce emissions (e.g., CO2).
One highly prioritized topic in the lightweight sector is the combination of natural fibers and wood
materials with polymers. When using wood in such material combinations it is usually applied as
short fiber or wood flour, e.g., in wood–plastic compound (WPC). To take advantage of the mechanical
behavior of the wood structure with its anisotropic characteristic, it is necessary to investigate the
material combination of polymer materials with veneer lumber [1] (p. 351).
1.1. Wood and Polymer Materials for Lightweight Applications
Lightweight materials are used in several industries like aerospace, automotive, or construction.
The application of these materials addresses the reduction of weight and therefore CO2 emissions.
When using bio-based or biodegradable materials, this factor is targeted even more effectively.
The typical characteristics needed for lightweight solutions are materials with a high mechanical
performance and a low weight ratio. By combining materials from different material classes like,
wood and polymer, the advantages of the materials can be combined. For this specific combination,
wood as a fiber-reinforced material and the formability of polymer are the main advantages [1].

4. Discussion
The results achieved extend the knowledge of the shear-cutting process on wood veneer. There
were no specific findings available before this study. Compared to previous studies, the results showed
a detailed cutting-edge surface and material damage in the working area of the cut. Since wood
material is comparable to reinforced materials, some of the findings on the cutting edge might apply for
e.g., fiber-reinforced plastics. The examination of the shear-cutting process on wood material showed
significant differences of the surface and cutting-edge behavior, compared to metal materials. Due to
its hollow and fibrous structure, wood showed more brittle cutting characteristic than metal. There
was no burr zone detectable on the backside of the workpiece. This was caused by the characteristic of
the fibers—there was no plastic deformation possible. The forces applied on the cutting edge were
guided by the whole composite structure, so the resulting cutting edge showed approximately no
interlaminar damages.
Different punching tool shapes were used to evaluate the influence of the drawing and pushing
cutting mechanism. The determination of the surface edge showed that a drawing cut led to more
fiber breakage but lower cutting forces, while the pushing cut showed a clean cutting-edge but higher
cutting forces. This was correlated to the cutting mechanism itself. The longer the cutting length,
the less force was applied on single fibers. Small cutting sections could not take the resulting cutting
load and led to fiber breakage.
The influence of the grain orientation was examined by cutting in different fiber directions. When
the cutting force was applied orthogonal to the fibers (γc: 90◦
), the resulting cutting force was high.
Fibers are the reason for the anisotropic characteristic of the wood material and cannot take loads
longitudinal to the fiber orientation (γc: 0◦
). The results showed that for the grain orientation of γc: 0◦
,
the surface characteristics (sectional ratio and order) were not reliably influenced. The cutting forces
correlated directly on the closing forces of the mold. The specific force per distance could be used to
determine the closing force for a specific mold size. In addition, the varying cutting forces, depending
on the workpiece grain orientation, could lead to a tilt motion of the cutting tool and different wear
effects. The number of growth rings was a significant influence parameter for the process forces and
needs to be regarded in further investigations.
Investigating the cutting speed showed a reduction of the cutting forces at high speeds. When
cutting at higher speeds, the influence of the dynamic proportion of the cutting force lowered.
In contrast to this, the static proportion of the cutting force correlated to the workpiece material and
its shear strength. The variation of cutting speeds in the low value range was not significant to the
quality of the cutting edge. When using higher cutting speeds, this might change due to force transfer
between the fibers.
The different wood types showed different cutting-edge characteristics, due to their specific
structure. Additionally, the appearance of early and late wood had an influence on the cutting force due
to their different strength values. Using more homogenous wood types like beech and birch showed
less difference in cutting forces for different cutting angles. Specifically maple showed high differences
in these values and was therefore not suitable for the preferably constant cutting forces in circular cuts.
The findings on the influence of moisture were not clearly related to mechanisms in the wood
material. While the beech and oak specimen showed a decreasing cutting force with increasing
moisture, birch and maple materials showed the opposite. The values showed no correlation to the
mechanical characteristics of the wood type. The specimen size influenced the water absorption of the
specific material. When the moisture content was increased, the specimen were weighed, the dispersion
within the specimen was not evaluated, and it could have had an influence. Especially the experiments
on the influence of moisture were complex to perform due to the chronological order of the process
steps. Therefore, more experiments need to be done to evaluate the influence of humidity in wood on
the cutting behavior. As one of the most important factors on the properties of wood and polymer,
humidity needs to be described intensively. The moisture content of wood is a complex influence.
By targeting the combination of an injection-molding process, this parameter should be investigated
further. For this, the exact process conditions should be known (e.g., temperatures of mold and melted
polymer and moisture content for specific bending ratio of the veneer).
Another important future experiment would be the determination of the bonding strength of
the wood and the polymer component. The effects of the bonding mechanisms on the surface were
partly investigated, but even more, the influence of the surface structure of the wood was considered
to be relevant. The formation of undercuts at the cutting edge could lead to enlarged bonding areas
and not only chemical but positive-fit connection. By investigating the bonding behavior of different
shear-cutting surfaces to the polymer material, it would be possible to define the target structure.
The experiments did not include investigations on coniferous wood. The deformation behavior
of the wood types differed due to the different strength properties (shear strength, tensile strength).
In order to illustrate dependencies and interdependencies, and especially the difference to deciduous
woods, these values will be determined in future experiments.
Future studies using high quality and comparable raw material would be beneficial. When
presenting the results, it was shown that there were some values with higher standard deviations.
Due to the standard deviation of the values, it was still appropriate to use full-factorized Design of
experiments (DOE) with a high amount (≥10) of specimen per variation. It is helpful to characterize
the veneer basically (density, tensile strength properties under the influence of moisture) to find
dependencies. Depending on the origin, veneer manufacturing (e.g., drying process, cut) and quality
of the wood used for the investigations, the relations described and the force values could differ when
repeating the same experiments. When collating the current findings on wood cutting mechanisms,
it was found that surface roughness was often investigated. To make the results more comparable to
other cutting techniques, it would be helpful to collect surface roughness data when shear cutting.

5. Conclusions
The aim of this study was to investigate the shear-cutting properties of wood veneer. Regarding
the parameters of the shear-cutting process (cutting angle to grain orientation, cutting speed, and
testing temperature), as well as the tool-related parameters (punching tool shape) and material-related
parameters (wood kind, moisture content), the cutting-edge surface and the maximum cutting force
were examined. These investigations were conducted with respect to important findings for our
research, aiming at the process combination of shear-cutting and injection molding. Due to the lack of
knowledge about shear-cutting wood materials, the investigation provided the fundamental results of
the parameter correlations, the process forces, and the cutting-edge qualities.
Analyzing the cutting edge of the specimens showed that the wood materials behave differently
at every single specimen, due to its natural origin. However, correlations of the parameters and
the main characteristics could be shown. When shear-cutting wood, the material showed a specific
cutting-edge surface characteristic. The micro-sectional analysis showed that the different sections
varied or disappeared when different process, tool, or material parameters were used. The first
millimeters were highly influenced by the applied forces of tension loads. These loads led to fiber
breakage, especially when a drawing cut with an angled tool was used. The roll over zone was where
the bended fibers could be seen without breakage. The torn zone in which the fibers bent, compressed,
and cut the deviation of the cutting edge, was the highest. Following these sections, a clear cut-zone
was detected. The different sections changed their dimensions when different parameters were used.
The findings were used to analyze the conflict of low cutting forces and high cutting-edge quality,
as is usual for the shear-cutting process. The results in Table 2 show the high potential of the conflict
between the parameters in a shear-cutting tool. Low cutting forces appear at higher cutting speeds
with an angled tool shape. Additionally, a higher moisture content led to low cutting forces. When
looking one step further and including the targeted injection-molding process, the moisture content
was the most difficult variable due to the bonding of wet wood and polymer. In the investigations,
beech showed the lowest cutting forces. For the cutting-edge quality, a straight cut with a minimum of
tear or broken fibers was targeted. This appeared for cutting orthogonal to the fiber direction and with
a straight shaped punch.

